---
title: "(11) Ethylene glycol revisited: Molecular dynamics simulations and visualization of the liquid and its hydrogen-bond network"
collection: publications
category: articles
permalink: /publication/2014-01-01_kaiser
excerpt: '<i>Keywords:</i> Ethylene glycol; Molecular dynamics; OPLS-AA force fields; Hydrogen-bonds; Visualization'
date: 2014-01-01
venue: 'Journal of Molecular Liquids'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2013.05.033'
citation: "Kaiser, A., Ismailova, O., Koskela, A., Huber, S. E., Ritter, M., Cosenza, B., Benger, W., Nazmutdinov, R., & Probst, M. (2014). Ethylene glycol revisited: Molecular dynamics simulations and visualization of the liquid and its hydrogen-bond network. <i>Journal of Molecular Liquids, 189</i>, 20-29."
---

Molecular dynamics simulations of liquid ethylene glycol described by the OPLS-AA force field were performed to gain insight into its hydrogen-bond structure. We use the population correlation function as a statistical measure for the hydrogen-bond lifetime. In an attempt to understand the complicated hydrogen-bonding, we developed new molecular visualization tools within the Vish Visualization shell and used it to visualize the life of each individual hydrogen-bond. With this tool hydrogen-bond formation and breaking as well as clustering and chain formation in hydrogen-bonded liquids can be observed directly. Liquid ethylene glycol at room temperature does not show significant clustering or chain building. The hydrogen-bonds break often due to the rotational and vibrational motions of the molecules leading to an H-bond half-life time of approximately 1.5 ps. However, most of the H-bonds are reformed again so that after 50 ps only 40% of these H-bonds are irreversibly broken due to diffusional motion. This hydrogen-bond half-life time due to diffusional motion is 80.3 ps. The work was preceded by a careful check of various OPLS-based force fields used in the literature. It was found that they lead to quite different angular and H-bond distributions.