---
title: "(25) Electron-Induced Chemistry of Cobalt Tricarbonyl Nitrosyl (Co(CO)<sub>3</sub>NO) in Liquid Helium Nanodroplets"
collection: publications
category: articles
permalink: /publication/2015-08-11_postler
excerpt: '<i>Keywords:</i> Liquid helium nanodroplets; Cobalt chemistry; Low-energy electron attachment; Dissociative electron attachment'
date: 2015-08-11
venue: 'The Journal of Physical Chemistry C'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b05260'
citation: "Postler, J., Renzler, M., Kaiser, A., Huber, S. E., Probst, M., Scheier, P., & Ellis, A. M. (2015). Electron-Induced Chemistry of Cobalt Tricarbonyl Nitrosyl (Co(CO)<sub>3</sub>NO) in Liquid Helium Nanodroplets. <i>The Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 119</i>, 20917-20922."
---

Electron addition to cobalt tricarbonyl nitrosyl (Co(CO<sub>3</sub>NO) and its clusters has been explored in helium nanodroplets. Anions were formed by adding electrons with controlled energies, and reaction products were identified by mass spectrometry. Dissociative electron attachment (DEA) to the Co(CO)<sub>3</sub>NO monomer gave reaction products similar to those reported in earlier gas phase experiments. However, loss of NO was more prevalent than loss of CO, in marked contrast to the gas phase. Since the Co–N bond is significantly stronger than the Co–C bond, this preference for NO loss must be driven by selective reaction dynamics at low temperature. For [Co(CO)<sub>3</sub>NO]<sub>N</sub> clusters, the DEA chemistry is similar to that of the monomer, but the anion yields as a function of electron energy show large differences, with the relatively sharp resonances of the monomer being replaced by broad profiles peaking at much higher electron energies. A third experiment involved DEA of Co(CO)<sub>3</sub>NO on a C<sub>60</sub> molecule in an attempt to simulate the effect of a surface. Once again, broad ion yield curves are seen, but CO loss now becomes the most probable reaction channel. The implication of these findings for understanding focused electron beam induced deposition of cobalt is described.