---
title: "(5) Exploring Minimal Narrative Frames in Gamified Learning: A Pilot Study on Narrative Transportation and Flow"
collection: publications
category: proceedings
permalink: /publication/2026-03-22_boehlke
excerpt: '<i>Keywords:</i> gamified learning; narrative framing; narrative transportation; flow'
date: 2026-03-22
venue: 'Proceedings of the 10th Annual International GamiFIN Conference 2026'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1145/3789624.3789627'
citation: 'Boehlke, E., Huber, S. E., Kiili, K., Ninaus M. (2026): Exploring Minimal Narrative Frames in Gamified Learning: A Pilot Study on Narrative Transportation and Flow. Proceedings of the 10th Annual International GamiFIN Conference 2026, March 23-27, 2026, Saariselkä, Finland. ACM Inc., New York, NY, 22, 1-6.'
---

Narratives have been proposed as a promising means to enhance engagement, motivation, and learning. However, their specific effects and mechanisms in gamified learning environments remain insufficiently explored. This pilot study aimed to investigate whether an additional, minimal narrative frame could improve cognitive and motivational outcomes in a learning task. We further examined whether exposure to the narrative would increase narrative transportation and flow and how these states correlate with learning performance and motivation. Fifty-six participants were included in the preliminary data analysis and were randomly assigned to one of four task versions, differing in gamification (gamified vs. non-gamified) and narrative framing (low vs. high). While no significant group differences were observed, positive associations were found between narrative transportation, flow, and both cognitive and motivational outcomes. Building on these findings, we designed an upcoming full-scale study to implement a visually and conceptually even richer narrative by integrating comic strips into the gamified learning task, aiming to enhance absorption, narrative transportation, and emotional engagement while maintaining low cognitive load.