---
title: "(65) Comparative Study on Calculated Properties of Platinum-based Molecules"
collection: talks
type: "Poster"
permalink: /talks/2018-10-11_Dyson
venue: "Dynamics of Systems on the Nanoscale (DySoN 2018)"
date: 2018-10-11
location: "Potsdam, Germany"
---

<u>Contributors</u>: <b>Süß, D.</b>, Huber, S. E., & Mauracher, A.

<u>Venue</u>: Dynamics of Systems on the Nanoscale (DySoN 2018), Potsdam, Germany, October 8-12, 2018

<u>Abstract</u>: Platinum-based molecules are among the most leading substances administered in the course of anticancer chemotherapy [1]. For the numerical description of molecular processes involving these molecules (especially in the relevant biomolecular environment) a procedure which seems satisfying with respect to a suitable balance between computational efficiency and accuracy at the electronic structure level remains elusive. In this contribution we present key findings resulting from  a comparison of various density functionals and ab-initio methods concerning their performance with respect to geometric and energetic properties of platinum-containing compounds. These properties include bond length, binding energy, electron affinity and heat of formation.<br />
For validation purposes, our hitherto exploratory study is restricted to a set of molecules for which reasonably accurate experimental data exist. Our choice of density functionals is based on earlier comparative studies concerning relative accuracies of different functionals (see e.g. Refs [2,3]) and on the typical usage of some density functionals (like B3LYP [4]) lacking often in validation of their suitability for the specific system under investigations. Eventual shortcomings in the accuracy with respect to non-metal containing biomolecules are monitored by using an additional test set consisting of such compounds. Moreover, we vary the portion of Hartree-Fock exchange energy used in some of the considered hybrid density functionals in order to explore possible gains in accuracy for the specific systems under investigations here.

REFERENCES<br />
[1] S. Dasari, and P. B. Tchounwou, Cisplatin in cancer therapy: molecular mechanisms of action; Eur. J. Pharmacol. 740 (2014) 364. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejphar.2017.07.025
[2] M. Kokoschka, J. Galgonek, J. Vondrasek, P. Hobza, Computational methods for the description of pharmacologically relevant platinum complexes – molecular structure and bond dissociation; Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 18 (2016) 4051. https://doi.org/10.1039/c5cp03391h
[3] Y. Minenkov, E. Chermak, L. Cavallo, Troubles in the Systematic Prediction of Transition Metal Thermochemistry with Contemporary Out-of-the-Box Methods; J. Chem. Theo. Comp. 12 (2016) 1542. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.5b01163 
[4] A. D. Becke, Density-functional thermochemistry. III. The role of exact exchange; J. Chem. Phys. 98 (1993) 5648. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.464913


<!---
[Slides](http://stefaneha.github.io/files/2024-09-16_OEGP.pdf){:target="_blank"}
-->