---
title: "(74) Using Cross Recurrence Quantification Analysis to unravel dyadic gaze dynamics: A dual mobile Eye Tracking Study"
collection: talks
type: "Poster"
permalink: /talks/2022-09-08_ESSEM
venue: "European Summer School on Eye Movements (ESSEM) 2022"
date: 2022-09-08
location: "Bonn, Germany"
---

<u>Contributors</u>: Haraped, L., Huber, S. E., <b>Kinzel, K.</b>, Sachse, P. 

<u>Venue</u>: European Summer School on Eye Movements (ESSEM), Bonn, Germany, September 5-10, 2022

<u>Abstract</u>: When two individuals interact face to face, their gaze behavior becomes interdependent since both parts continuously react to each other and coordinate their behavior in real time. Traditional analyses that aggregate data over time or participants fall short on describing such system dynamics. One way to investigate such temporal dynamics of dyadic gaze systems is cross recurrence quantification analysis (CRQA), a method that depicts and quantifies recurrent behavioral states over different lags in time. While this has been applied in studies using stationary eye tracking, the current project aims to utilize CRQA on dual mobile eye tracking data of collaborating individuals. In an exploratory way we try to find out to what extent gaze movements of interlocutors mutually adapt while collaborating. To do so, participants were asked to rank a number of items on pictures to their objective, relative importance within 4 minutes. Eye movements were recorded using Tobii Glasses 2 and manually coded using Mangold Interact. Using the R-package ‘crqa‘ on data from one example dyad, several plots that describe this dyad’s shared gaze dynamics were generated and will be discussed. First results suggest task dependend coupling in gaze over time, which can be read off well from the plots. Further, the recurrence plot allows to conclude about the interlocutors’ collaborative strategies. Overall, CRQA shows to be suitable to reveal dyadic gaze dynamics from mobile eye tracking data, which, with some experience, can be read off at a glance.