---
title: "(81) Engagement and motivation as mediators of effects of game elements on cognitive learning outcomes"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2024-09-16_OEGP
venue: "53rd DGPs Congress/15th ÖGP Conference"
date: 2024-09-16
location: "Graz, Austria"
---

<u>Contributors</u>: <b>Huber, S. E. </b>, Lindstedt, A., Kiili, K., & Ninaus, M.

<u>Venue</u>: 53rd DGPs Congress/15th ÖGP Conference, Vienna, Austria, September 16-19, 2024

<u>Abstract</u>: The use of game elements in learning tasks is often justified by their capabilities to increase learners’ engagement, motivation, and consequently, cognitive learning outcomes. Even if game elements lack a direct effect on cognitive outcomes, they can be beneficial if they keep learners engaged and support long-term loyalties. Based on the results of three studies, we present insights on the mechanisms underlying such affective and motivational effects of game elements. All three studies comprise value-added research comparing less gameful and more gameful versions of a specifically developed, associative learning task. The first study was conducted online, initiated by 1688 and completed by 316 participants, focusing particularly at behavioral engagement and attrition over the course of the learning task. We found that game elements significantly mitigate participant dropout and enhance behavioral engagement. In a second online study, completed by 61 participants, we found that game elements were especially suited to serve learners’ motivation. This effect was further partially mediated by an increase in positive affect in agreement with basic, theoretical considerations. In a third, and currently ongoing laboratory study, we explore the relations between game elements and affective dynamics supposedly mediating the motivational effects of game elements. All three studies empirically test an established theoretical framework allowing to deepen our understanding of learning with multimedia. They further allow to extend the framework by shedding a light on other influencing factors like inter-individual differences and environmental and contextual aspects.

[Slides](http://stefaneha.github.io/files/2024-09-16_OEGP.pdf){:target="_blank"}