---
title: "(79) Investigating cognitive, affective, and motivational effects of game elements for learning"
collection: talks
type: "Poster"
permalink: /talks/2024-08-22_SIG
venue: "2024 joint Special Interest Group Conference of EARLI SIG 6 (Instructional Design) and SIG 7 (Technology-Enhanced Learning and Instruction)"
date: 2024-08-22
location: "Tübingen, Germany"
---

<u>Contributors</u>: <b>Huber, S. E. </b>, Lindstedt, A., Kiili, K., & Ninaus, M.

<u>Venue</u>: 2024 joint Special Interest Group Conference of EARLI SIG 6 (Instructional Design) and SIG 7 (Technology-Enhanced Learning and Instruction), Tübingen, Germany, August 21-23, 2024

<u>Abstract</u>: The use of game features in learning tasks is often justified by their capabilities to increase learners’ engagement, motivation, and consequently, cognitive learning outcomes. Even if game features lack a direct effect on cognitive outcomes, they can be beneficial if they keep learners engaged and support long-term loyalties. Discussing three consecutive studies, we present insights on the mechanisms underlying such affective and motivational effects of game features. All three studies comprise value-added research comparing less gameful and more gameful versions of a specifically developed, associative learning task. The first study was conducted online, focusing particularly at behavioral engagement and attrition over the course of the learning task. We found that game features significantly mitigate participant dropout and enhance behavioral engagement. In a second online study, we found that game features were especially suited to serve learners’ motivation. This effect was further partially mediated by an increase in positive affect. In a third, and currently ongoing laboratory study, we explore the relations between game features and affective dynamics supposedly mediating their motivational effects. All three studies aim for a better understanding of how or under which circumstances game features may be beneficial or detrimental for learning. The resulting, refined conceptual understanding shall then support the development of both more engaging and more effective educational experiences.

[Poster](https://stefaneha.github.io/files/2024-08-22_SIG.pdf){:target="_blank"}