---
title: "(80) How engagement and motivation mediate effects of game elements on learning"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2024-07-23_ICP
venue: "33rd International Congress of Psychology (ICP 2024)"
date: 2024-07-23
location: "Prague, Czech Republic"
---

<u>Contributors</u>: <b>Huber, S. E. </b>, Cortez, R., Leinonen, M., Pöschko, J., Rohrer, E., Pahovnikar, F., Gayduscheck, F., Lindstedt, A., Kiili, K., & Ninaus, M.

<u>Venue</u>: 33rd International Congress of Psychology (ICP 2024), Prague, Czech Republic, July 21-26, 2024

<u>Abstract</u>: The inclusion of game elements in learning tasks is typically justified by their capabilities to increase learners’ engagement, motivation, and consequently, learning outcomes. A theoretical framework describing the interplay between cognitive, affective and motivational factors is provided by the Integrated Cognitive Affective Model of Learning with Multimedia (ICALM). In ICALM, cognitive processes are inseparably intertwined with affective processes during learning, eventually fostering enhanced engagement and motivation. However, the exact mechanisms by which especially game elements can influence affective dynamics are not yet fully elaborated. In this contribution, we report results from three studies aiming at illuminating such mechanisms. All three studies comprise value-added research comparing non-game-based and game-based versions of an association learning task, specifically developed for these experiments. The first study was a large-scale online study, initiated by 1688 and completed by 316 participants, focusing particularly at behavioral engagement and attrition during learning. We found that game elements significantly mitigate participant dropout. Especially participants with lower self-efficacy seemed to benefit from game elements. In a second, smaller, online study, completed by 61 participants, we found that game elements were especially suited to serve learners’ need for competence. Mediation models revealed that the increased cognitive cost introduced by game elements was effectively balanced by their benefits regarding motivation and engagement. In a third, and currently ongoing laboratory study, we explore the relations between game elements and affective dynamics, which, according to ICALM, supposedly mediate the motivational effects of game elements. All three studies empirically test an established theoretical framework allowing to deepen our understanding of learning with multimedia. They further allow to extend the framework by illuminating some of the mechanisms underlying it and by shedding a light on other influencing factors like personality and experimental context conditions.

[Slides](http://stefaneha.github.io/files/2024-07-23_ICP.pdf){:target="_blank"}