---
title: "(83) Establishing a new computational method to predict effects of gaming: A feasibility study on growth mindset"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2024-11-21_GALA
venue: "Games and Learning Alliance: 13th International Conference, GALA 2024"
date: 2024-11-21
location: "Berlin, Germany"
---

<u>Contributors</u>: <b>Ninaus, M. </b>, Edlinger, M., Scheucher, N., & Huber, S. E.

<u>Venue</u>: Games and Learning Alliance: 13th International Conference, GALA 2024, Berlin, Germany, November 20-22, 2024

<u>Abstract</u>: We present a novel method for approximating potential psychological effects of video games on players utilizing computational text analysis and artificial intelligence. Focusing specifically on growth mindset – a psychological construct associated with learning and resilience – we analyze player-generated reviews on the Steam gaming platform. In particular, reviews were examined using a specifically developed growth mindset dictionary derived from key psychological texts and validated questionnaires. Utilizing over 1 million user-generated reviews across eight distinct game genres, we identified that puzzle, roguelike, and platformer games showed a higher prevalence of growth mindset-related terms when compared to genres that we considered unrelated to growth mindset (e.g., zen, cozy, walking simulator). This aligns well with a growth mindset meaning system, as these genres inherently involve setting objectives, exerting effort, learning from setbacks, and refining strategies through gameplay. In addition, exploratory BERTopic modeling identified four topics with a clear relation to the concept of a growth mindset. These topics emerged differentially across genres with a pattern like the one found with the dictionary, further corroborating our findings. These results confirm theoretical assumptions in the field with a new methodological approach, opening avenues for precisely targeted research on video game effects and informed selection of video game-based interventions.

<!---
[Slides](http://stefaneha.github.io/files/2024-09-16_OEGP.pdf){:target="_blank"}
-->