---
title: "(92) Cognitive, affective, and motivational effects of gamified learning in a research-guided teaching context"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2025-11-19_GALA
venue: "Games and Learning Alliance: 14th International Conference (GALA 2025)"
date: 2025-11-19
location: "Utrecht, The Netherlands"
---

<u>Contributors</u>: <b>Huber, S. E. </b>, Rajh-Weber, H., Cloude, E. B., Boehlke, E., Edlinger, M., Kiili, K., & Ninaus, M.

<u>Venue</u>: Games and Learning Alliance: 14th International Conference, GALA 2025, Utrecht, The Netherlands, November 19 - 21, 2025

<u>Abstract</u>: While evidence accumulates that gamified learning has small to moderate positive overall effects on learning outcomes, these effects may considerably depend on the exact conditions in which learning occurs. This study investigated the effect of embedding a gamified learning task within a homework assignment in a uni-versity course on cognitive, motivational, and affective outcomes (in contrast to online and laboratory settings unrelated to specific educational contexts investi-gated in earlier studies). Fifty students, enrolled in a basic statistics course, com-pleted either a gamified or an equivalent, non-gamified memory task as a home-work assignment. Their outcomes were compared with 97 participants not en-rolled in the course (overall: n = 147). We found that gamified learning had small to medium significant effects on motivation (d ~ 0.4-0.6), regardless of enroll-ment in the course. Effects on affective and cognitive learning outcomes were not significant, ranging from negligible to small effect sizes (d ≤ 0.25). Juxtaposing our present results with earlier results suggests that, beyond the setting itself, ad-ditional contextual features may change the motivational effectiveness of gamified learning in the present, homework assignment setting compared to earlier extra-curricular (online and laboratory) settings. Further research on potential boundary conditions is required.

[Slides](https://osf.io/8rth2/files/tk38e){:target="_blank"}